A digital system is also refereed as a digital processor, which is capable of carrying out a DSP function or operation. The
digital system takes variety of forms, such as a microprocessor, a programmed general-purpose computer, a part of digital
device or a piece of computing software.
Among digital systems, linear time-invariant (LTI) systems are basic and common. For those reasons, it will be restricted
to address about only the LTI systems in this whole book.
The linearity is an important and realistic assumption in dealing with a large number of digital systems, which satisfies
the following relationships between input and output described by Figure 3.1. i.e. a single input [ ] 1 x n produces a single
output [ ] 1 y n , Applying sum of inputs [ ] [ ] 1 2 x n + x n produces [ ] [ ] 1 2 y n + y n , and applying input [ ] [ ] 1 2 ax n bx n
generates [ ] [ ] 1 2 ay n by n .
The linearity can be described as the combination of a scaling rule and a superposition rule. The time-invariance requires
the function of the system does not vary with the time. e.g. a cash register at a supermarket adds all costs of purchased
items x[n], x[n −1],… at check-out during the period of interest, and the total cost y[n] is given by
where y[n] is the total cost, and if x[0] is an item registered at this moment, x[−1] then is the item at the last moment,
etc. The calculation method as a simple sum of all those item’s costs is assumed to remain invariant at the supermarket,
at least, for the period of interest.
Like a differential equation is used to describe the relationship between its input and output of a continuous system, a
difference equation can be used to characterise the relationship between the input and output of a digital system. Many
systems in real life can be described by a continuous form of differential equations. When a differential equation takes a
discrete form, it generates a difference equation. For example, a first order differential equation is commonly a mathematical
model for describing a heater’s rising temperature, water level drop of a leaking tank, etc:
where x[n] is the input and y[n] is the output. For digital case, the derivative can be described as
i.e. the ratio of the difference between the current sample and one backward sample to the time interval of the two samples.
Therefore, the differential equation can be approximately represented by a difference equation:
yielding a standard form difference equation:
For input’s derivative, we have similar digital form as
Further, the second order derivative in a differential equation contains can be discretised as
When the output can be expressed only by the input and shifted input, the difference equation is called non-recursive
equation, such as
On the other hand, if the output is expressed by the shifted output, the difference equation is a recursive equation, such as
where the output y[n] is expressed by it shifted signals y[n −1] , y[n − 2], etc. In general, an LTI processor can be
represented as
or a short form
A difference equation is not necessarily from the digitization of differential equation. It can originally take digital form,
such as the difference equation in Eq.(3.1).
Alternatively, equivalent to the difference equation, an LTI system can also be represented by a block diagram, which also
characterises the input and output relationship for the system.
For example, to draw a block diagram for the digital system described by the difference equation:
The output can be rewrite as
The block diagram for the system is shown in Figure 3.2.
In the bock diagram, T is the sampling interval, which acts as a delay or right-shift by one sample in time. For general
cases, instead of Eq.(3.9), Eq. (3.8) is used for drawing a block diagram. It can easily begin with the input, output flows
and the summation operator, then add input and output branches.
Both the difference equation and block diagram can be used to describe a digital system. Furthermore, the impulse response
can also be used to represent the relationship between input and output of a digital system. As the terms suggest, impulse
response is the response to the simplest input – unit impulse. Figure 3.2 illustrates a digital LTI system, in which the input
is the unit impulse and the output is the impulse response.
Once the impulse response of a system is known, it can be expected that the response to other types of input can be derived.
An LTI system can be classified as causal or non-causal. A causal system is refereeing to those in which the response is no
earlier than input, or h[n] =0 before n=0. This is the case for most of practical systems or the systems in the natural world.
However, non-causal system can exist if the response is arranged, such as programmed, to be earlier than the excitation.
The impulse response of a system can be evaluated from its difference equation. Following are the examples of finding
the values of impulse responses from difference equations
Example 3.1 Evaluating the impulse response for the following systems 
We know that when the input is the simplest unit impulse d[n], the output response will be the impulse response. Therefore,
replacing input x[n] by d[n] and response y[n] by h[n], the equation is still holding and has become special:
It is easy to evaluate the impulse response by letting n=-1, 0,1,2,3,…
Generally for the difference equation:
The impulse response can evaluated by the special equation with the simple unit impulse input:
The step response is also commonly used to characterize the relationship between the input and output of a system. To
find the step response using the impulse response, we know that the unit step can be expressed by unit impulses as
The linear system satisfies the superposition rule. Therefore, the step response is a sum of a series of impulse responses
excited by a series of shifted unit impulses. i.e., the step response is a sum of impulse responses