The previous chapters on controller design have mainly concentrated on introducing the
compensator in the forward path, but use of a simple compensator in the feedback path has been
discussed. Also feedback compensation has been mentioned with respect to the PI-PD controller
and velocity feedback in a position control system. Both these two cases can be regarded as
feedback of two states, namely, the output to form the error and the derivative of the output. It is
therefore appropriate to look in general at how the performance of a control system can be
changed by the feedback of state variables. If this is to be done in practice then the state variables
have to be available either as measured values or estimates. Obtaining measurements can be
costly because of the requirement for additional sensors so in many cases the variables are
estimated using estimation methods. This is a topic outside the scope of this book but it will
suffice to say that estimation methods have become relatively easy to implement with the use of
modern technologies employing microprocessors with significant software included to do the
required computations. In the next section results are derived for full state variable feedback and
this is followed by a discussion of the linear quadratic regulator problem. The problem of direct
closed loop transfer function synthesis, or standard forms, is looked at again in terms of using
state variable feedback to achieve such a design. Finally as an example of the benefits of using a
state variable feedback design the problem of controlling a plant having a transfer function with
lightly damped complex poles, considered initially in section 9.5 is reconsidered.
Consider a SISO system, G, with a state space representation (A,B,C,0). Assume state feedback
is used so that the system input u K (v k T x)
c 􀀠􀀐, as shown in Figure 11.1. Here the row vector
kT, is given by 􀀋. . . . .􀀌1 2 3 n
k T 􀀠k k k k , which means that the signal fed back and
subtracted from v is n n k x k x ......k x 1 1 2 2 􀀎. The thick line is used to show that it represents more
than one signal, in this case the state x which has n components.
The new system, with input v, is
which can be written
where the matrices
Now suppose the original system was in controllable canonical form so that
as the matrix T
c c BK k is all zeros apart from the last row. The gain vector has been subscripted by
c to denote that it has state inputs from the controllable canonical form.
Thus the characteristic equation of the system with state feedback is
and in principle the poles can be placed anywhere by choice of the components of T
c k . Larger
values of the components of T
c k will speed up the system response but in practice this will not be
possible due to physical limitations on the magnitudes of signals for linear operation. The gain Kc
is basically redundant, however, it is useful to include it as the structure might, as is clear from
Figure 11.1, be a resultant closed loop system with Kc the controller gain. In this case the
controller input will include the error and for this to be the case when the state x1 is the output, k1
will be equal to one. If the system is not in controllable canonical form then the coefficient terms
in the characteristic equation will not each involve a single feedback gain. This means that
simultaneous equations need to be solved to find the required feedback gains to give a specific
characteristic equation. One way to avoid this is to transform the original system to controllable
canonical form, determine the required feedback gains for this representation and then transform
these gains back to the required feedback values from the original states. The system must be
controllable to do this transformation and it can be shown that this is a required condition to be
able to place the poles in desired locations. Thus, if the calculated state feedback gain vector is
kc
T from the controllable form states xc and the transformation from the original states x is x = Txc
then the required vector kT for the original states, x, is obtained from the relationship kT = kc
TT-1.
Several algorithms are available in MATLAB which calculate the required feedback gain vector
kT for a given system (A,B) to give specified pole locations
The feedback signal kTx can be written in transfer function terms as k T􀀩(s)BU and the output
Y(s) 􀀠C􀀩(s)BU so that in terms of the classical block diagram of Figure 5.1 the state feedback
is equivalent to a feedback transfer function of
( )
( ) ( )
C s
H s k s
T
􀀩
􀀩
􀀠.
It can be shown [11.1] for a state space representation with matrix A and column vector B that if
a performance index
is to be minimised then the required control signal, u(t), is given u(t) 􀀠􀀐k T x(t) , a linear
function of the state variables. Further the value of the feedback gain vector is given by
k T 􀀠R􀀐1BT P where P is the unique positive definite symmetrical matrix solution of the
algebraic Riccati equation (ARE)
Obviously the solution for kT depends upon the choice of the positive scalar, R, and the matrix Q
which must be at least semi-positive definite. Although this is a very elegant theoretical result,
the solution depends on the choice of the weighting matrix Q and scalar R. No simple method is
available for choosing their values so that the closed loop performance meets a given
specification. A further point is that whatever values are chosen then the open loop frequency
response must avoid the circle of unit radius centred at (-1,0) on the Nyquist plot [11.2]. This
means a phase margin of at least 90°, which makes the design very conservative. The command
[x,l,g] = care( A,B,cT*c,R) in MATLAB will return the solution P for the ARE in x, where the
vector c defines the matrix Q by Q 􀀠cT * c .