Digital signal processing (DSP) has become a common tool for many disciplines. The topic includes the methods of dealing
with digital signals and digital systems. The techniques are useful for all the branches of natural and social sciences which
involve data acquisition, analysis and management, such as engineering, physics, chemistry, meteorology, information
systems, financial and social services. Before the digital era, signal processing devices were dominated by analogue type.
The major reason for DSP advancement and shift from analogue is the extraordinary growth and popularization of digital
microelectronics and computing technology.
The reason that digital becomes a trend to replace analogue systems, apart from it is a format that microprocessors can be
easily used to carry out functions, high quality data storage, transmission and sophisticated data management are the other
advantages. In addition, only 0s and 1s are used to represent a digital signal, noise can easily be suppressed or removed.
The quality of reproduction is high and independent of the medium used or the number of reproduction. Digital images
are two dimensional digital signals, which represent another wide application of digital signals. Digital machine vision,
photographing and videoing are already widely used in various areas.
In the field of signal processing, a signal is defined as a quantity which carries information. An analogue signal is a signal
represented by a continuous varying quantity. A digital signal is a signal represented by a sequence of discrete values of
a quantity. The digital signal is the only form for which the modern microprocessor can take and exercise its powerful
functions. Examples of digital signals which are in common use include digital sound and imaging, digital television,
digital communications, audio and video devices.
To process a signal is to make numerical manipulation for signal samples. The objective of processing a signal can be to
detect the trend, to extract a wanted signal from a mixture of various signal components including unwanted noise, to
look at the patterns present in a signal for understanding underlying physical processes in the real world. To analyse a
digital system is to find out the relationship between input and output, or to design a processor with pre-defined functions,
such as filtering and amplifying under applied certain frequency range requirements. A digital signal or a digital system
can be analysed in time domain, frequency domain or complex domain, etc.
Representation of digital signals can be specific or generic. A digital signal is refereed to a series of numerical numbers,
such as:
where 2, 4, 6 are samples and the whole set of samples is called a signal. In a generic form, a digital signal can be represented
as time-equally spaced data
where -1, 0, 1, 2 etc are the sample numbers, x[0], x[1], x[2], etc are samples. The square brackets represent the digital
form. The signal can be represented as a compact form
In the signal, x[-1], x[1], x[100], etc, are the samples, n is the sample number. The values of a digital signal are only being
defined at the sample number variable n , which indicates the occurrence order of samples and may be given a specific
unit of time, such as second, hour, year or even century, in specific applications.
We can have many digital signal examples:
-- Midday temperature at Brighton city, measured on successive days,
-- Daily share price,
-- Monthly cost in telephone bills,
-- Student number enrolled on a course,
-- Numbers of vehicles passing a bridge, etc.
Examples of digital signal processing can be given in the following:
Example 1.1 To obtain a past 7 day’s average temperature sequence. The averaged temperature sequence for past 7 days is
For example, if n=0 represents today, the past 7 days average is
where x[0], x[−1], x[−2], ... represent the temperatures of today, yesterday, the day before yesterday, …; y[0]
represents the average of past 7 days temperature from today and including today. On the other hand,
represents the average of past 7 days temperature observed from tomorrow and including tomorrow, and so on. In a
shorter form, the new sequence of averaged temperature can be written as
where x[n] is the temperature sequence signal and y[n] is the new averaged temperature sequence. The purpose of average
can be used to indicate the trend. The averaging acts as a low-pass filter, in which fast fluctuations have been removed as
a result. Therefore, the sequence y[n] will be smoother than x[n].
Example 1.2. To obtain the past M day simple moving averages of share prices, let x[n] denotes the close price, y [n] M
the averaged close price over past M days.
For example, M=20 day simple moving average is used to indicate 20 day trend of a share price. M=5, 120, 250 (trading
days) are usually used for indicating 1 week, half year and one year trends, respectively. Figure 1.1 shows a share’s prices
with moving averages of different trading days.
Although some signals are originally digital, such as population data, number of vehicles and share prices, many practical
signals start off in analogue form. They are continuous signals, such as human’s blood pressure, temperature and heart
pulses. A continuous signal can be first converted to a proportional voltage waveform by a suitable transducer, i.e. the
analogue signal is generated. Then, for adapting digital processor, the signal has to be converted into digital form by
taking samples. Those samples are usually equally spaced in time for easy processing and interpretation. Figure 1.2 shows
a analogue signal and its digital signal by sampling with equal time intervals. The upper is the analogue signal x(t) and the
lower is the digital signal sampled at time t = nT, where n is the sample number and T is the sampling interval. Therefore,
For ease of storage or digital processing, an analogue signal must be sampled into a digital signal. The continuous signal
is being taken sample at equal time interval and represented by a set of members. First of all, a major question about it
is how often should an analogue signal be sampled, or how frequent the sampling can be enough to represent the details
of the original signal.