Consider a periodic digital signal x[n], n=0,1,2,...,N-1, where N is the number of sample values in each period. From
Euler’s complex exponential equation:
for each frequency k, Eq. (4.1) contains 2 sinusoidal functions in real and imaginary parts, respectively, with p/2 difference
in phase. The frequencies of the functions are k=0,1,2,...,N-1. The fundamental sinusoidal function is when the frequency
k=1. The other higher sinusoidal functions are called harmonics. The coefficients of Fourier Series for a digital signal can
be calculated by
where k a is kth spectral coefficient, indicating the strength of the kth harmonic function. The original digital signal x[n]
can be represented by its constituent harmonics as the form of discrete Fourier series:
The following Figure 4.1 illustrates how many complex multiplications are required in calculating those coefficients k a
and from k a to obtaining x[n]. It is basically N 2 in each occasion.
Example 4.1 A periodic signal x[n] = [0 2 4 6] has the period N=4, its coefficients of Fourier series can be calculated
by the formula
Figure 4.2 illustrates one period of the signal and its spectral coefficients.
Example 4.2 A sine wave
k=4 and N=64, the sine wave and its Fourier spectrum are shown
in the following Figure 4.3. It can be seen that the single sine wave gives a single spectral line at frequencies of 4 hz and
64-4=60 hz, or
The Fourier series introduced in previous section is only applicable to periodic signals. In general cases, the signal is
not periodic, and the Fourier series formula Eq. (4.2) is not applicable. Therefore, a Fourier Transform for non-periodic
signals must be introduced.
Let frequency (rad/sample) changes continuously between 0 and 2p. This can be achieved by assuming N is
big enough and the fundamental frequency is very small. Define a Fourier transform as
where X (W) is the Fourier spectrum, which is a continuous function, therefore, usual round brackets are used. It is also
a periodic function with a period of 2p as sinusoidal functions are multiplied in the transform.
Assuming N is big and using Eq.(4.3), the inverse Fourier transform can be defined:
Consider digital LTI systems, take Fourier transform for the input, impulse response and output:
where H(W) is known as the frequency response, which describes the gain of a system at different frequencies and can
be obtained by taking Fourier transform to the impulse response. The input-output relationship in the time and frequency
domains, and the time-frequency relationships of the three quantities are shown in Figure 4.4.
Using the convolution property of the Fourier transform, for the input-output relationship
apply the Fourier transform on both sides, it can be obtained
The frequency response can be obtained from the transforms of input and output:
Find the frequency response and sketch its magnitude and phase over the range 0<W<p.
Solution: Re-arrange the difference equation as
Let x[n] be a signal discretized with a sampling rate of fs Hz, we are about to find the position of peak for a complex
harmonic component with frequency in the frequency Ω (rad/sample) domain. Its Fourier
transform is given by
In the previous chapters, time domain and frequency domain analysis have been introduced. In each of those domains
different insights of digital signals are revealed. It is useful to introduce another domain: the z domain. A digital time
signal can be transferred into z domain by the z-transform. The z-transform is defined as
where z is a complex variable. The transform defined by Eq. (5.1) is a unilateral transform as defined on one side of the
axis 0 ≤ n < ∞. In the transform, each sample x[n] is multiplied by the complex variable z −n , i.e.
There is advantage in this unilateral transform definition as it can avoid mathematical inconvenience. One can shift the
signal of interest to obtain a required origin in its analysis, thus usually causing no trouble in applications.
The inverse z-transform can be found by
It involves contour integration, and further discussion is beyond the scope of this basic content. However, an alternative
approach is available using partial fractions together with z-transform formulas of basic functions. Table 5.1 lists the basic
properties of the z transform and Table 5.2 lists some basic z- transform pairs.
Example 5.1 Find the z transform for a signal and reconstruct a signal from its z-transform.
Let z = exp( jW) , i.e. the complex variable z is only allowed on the unit circle, the z-transform becomes a unilateral
Fourier transform
Obviously, apart from on the unit circle, the complex operator z can be specified into other curves or region, if necessary.
Later, it will be shown the unit circle is important boundary on the z-domain.
Multiplying by z implies a time advance and dividing by z, or multiplying by z −1 , is to cause a time delay. For the unit
impulse,
The transfer function describes the input-output relationship, or the transmissibility between input and output, in the
z-domain. Applying the z-transform to the output of a system, the relationship between the z-transforms of input and
output can be found:
i.e., the transfer function can be obtained from the z-transforms of input and output.
Alternatively, the transfer function H(z) can be obtained by applying z-transform directly to the impulse response h[n]
. The relationships of input ( x[n] and X (z) ), output ( y[n] and Y(z) ) and system function ( h[n] and H(z) ) in
the time and z domains are depicted in Figure 5.2.
Instead of using Eq.(5.2), the inverse z-transform can be made through partial fractions. The following are examples.
Example 5.2 A signal has a z-transform
find the corresponding original signal x[n].
The z-transform can be represented by partial fractions as
There is an alternative way of finding the coefficients for the partial fractions. For the above example,
poles and zeros
For the z-transform of a digital signal or a transfer function of an LTI system, generally it can be expressed as factorised
form for both the