Computer simulation is used to reduce the risk associated with creating new systems or with making
changes to existing ones. More than ever, modern organizations want assurance that investments will
produce the expected results. For instance, an assembly line may be required to produce a particular
number of autos during an eight hour shift. Complex, interacting factors influence operation and so
powerful tools are needed to develop an accurate analysis. Over the past few decades, computer
simulation software, together with statistical analysis techniques have evolved to give decision makers
tools equal to the task. As the world grows more technical and the need for precision becomes more
important, the margin for error will continue to shrink. Business, industry, and governments cannot afford
to make educated guesses during systems development. For that reason, computer simulation is more
important than ever.
Simulation uses a model to develop conclusions providing insight on the behavior of real-world elements
being studied. Computer simulation uses the same concept but requires the model be created through
computer programming. While this field has grown and flourished with availability of powerful software
and hardware, its origins in the desire to forecast future behaviors, run quite deep.
Men and women have attempted to foretell the future since ancient times. Kings employed wizards and
soothsayers. Various religions used prophets. Seers such as French apothecary Michel de Nostredame
(better known as Nostradamus) became famous with their visions of the future. Others attempted to make
predictions based on birth dates and the stars. Crystal balls, bones, and tarot cards were all used as tools to
probe the future.
Although this book does not advocate those methods, in the same way modern chemists bear a
relationship to the ancient alchemist, the modern simulation practitioner has a relationship with the ancient
prophet. Of course, methodologies used by modern simulation analysts bear virtually no similarity with
the prediction methods used in ancient times. However, there are common elements. For instance, each
sought to remove the risk of a future event or behavior and reduce uncertainty. The prophet tried to
accomplish this with the magic available at the time. Today, the simulation analyst uses the modern magic
of mathematical principles, experimentation, computer science and statistics.
Computer simulation can be classified as a branch applied mathematics. The use of computer simulation
increased due to availability of computing power and improvements in programming languages. Added to
this are inherent difficulties or even impossibilities to accurately describe complex real world systems
using analytical or purely mathematical models. For these reasons, a tool that can represent these
complexities accurately is required. Computer simulation can be broadly defined as:
“Using a computer to imitate the operations of a real world process or facility according to appropriately
developed assumptions taking the form of logical, statistical, or mathematical relationships which are
developed and shaped into a model.”
The result can be manipulated by varying a set of input parameters to help an analyst understand the
underlying system’s dynamics. The model typically is evaluated numerically over a simulated period of
time and data is gathered to estimate real world system characteristics. Generally, the collected data is
interpreted with statistics like any experiment.
Computer simulation can be an expensive, time consuming, and complicated problem solving technique.
Therefore, certain circumstances warrant its use. Situations well suited to its application include the
following (Table 1.1):
Real system does not yet exist and building a
prototype is cost prohibitive, time-consuming or
hazardous.
Aircraft, Production System, Nuclear Reactor
System is impossible to build.
National Economy, Biological System
Real system exists but experimentation is too
expensive, hazardous or disruptive to conduct.
Proposed Changes to a Materials Handling System,
Military Unit, Transportation System, Airport
Baggage Handling System
Forecasting is required to analyze long time periods
in a compressed format.
Population Growth, Forest Fire Spread,
Urbanization Studies, Pandemic Flu Spread
Mathematical modeling has no practical analytical
or numeric solution.
Stochastic Problems, Nonlinear Differential
Equations
Using computer simulation for analysis has many advantages over other decision making techniques.
Among these advantages are:
1. Allows Experimentation without Disruptions to Existing Systems - In systems that already exist,
testing new ideas may be difficult, costly, or impossible. Simulation allows a model to be
developed and compared to the system to ensure it accurately reflects current operation. Any
desired modifications can be made to the model first, the impact on the system examined, and
then a decision to implement the changes in the real world system can be made.
Example: Changing the Line
An automotive assembly line may run 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Shutting the line down,
putting in a temporary modification (which may or may not speed up a process), and resuming
production would be very expensive.
Example: Adding Equipment
Unless the machinery was already purchased, the process of adding it to the line and trying it firsthand
would be impossible.
2. Concept can be Tested Prior to Installation - A computer simulation will allow concepts to be
tested prior to the installation of new systems. This testing may reveal unforeseen design flaws
and give designers a tool for improvement. If the same flaws were discovered after installation,
changes to the system might end up being very costly or even impossible to implement.
Example: Purchase of an Automatic Storage and Retrieval system (ASRS)
Engineers in a medium sized company decide to replace an existing warehouse with an ASRS. After
stretching their tight budget to its outer limits, the equipment was procured and installed. Several
months of usage revealed the new system was unable to keep up with the demands for pallets being
entering and removed from the racks. Their assembly line process began to bog down because
material wasn't arriving from storage in a timely fashion. The budget was gone and upper
management told manufacturing to live with their decision. The entire situation could have been
avoided by simulating the ASRS system prior to purchase.
3. Detection of Unforeseen Problems or Bugs - When a system is simulated prior to installation and
found to work in concept, the model is often refined to include finer details. The detailed
simulation may reveal unforeseen problems or bugs that may exist in the system's design. By
discovering these problems prior to installation, debug time and rework costs can be avoided. In
addition, improvements to system operation may be discovered.