There has been a long running debate that concentrates on trying to decide whether simulation should be
defined as an art or a science. Those who believe it to be a science feel that statistics, mathematics, and
computer science comprise its foundation and are the basis for this classification. Others feel that the skill
of the modeling team, the creativity involved in developing the model, and the interpretation of the results
all add up to an individualized art. In this author's opinion, there is no real way to scientifically structure a
simulation to guarantee that its results are valid.
Instead, after the model has been coded and run, the outputs can be studied and compared with
corresponding known values to determine suitability. If no known values exist then the modeler must rely
on his instincts and the judgment of experts to make this determination. The creativity and instincts used
are akin to an art. Much of the methodology involved in model creation and analysis are based on
computer science and mathematical principles. Therefore, elements of art and science exist in modeling.
Simulation best may be defined as a “soft-science” containing both.
Figure 3.1 depicts the spectrum extending from art to science and the simulation's place. In recent years
simulation has been moving along the spectrum more toward the science end. Improvements in simulation
languages and the advent of simulators have removed some of the need to be as creative and innovative.
Much of the uncertainty in model creation has also been eliminated through the development of
application specific languages.
Numerous explanations exist for reasons behind the phenomenal growth computer simulation has
experienced both in terms of application areas and in the number of available software products. Among
these reasons are:
1. Improvements in computers: The first simulations were done on large, room-sized mainframe
computers. These computers relied on card decks and operated most often in the batch mode. Not
many people had access to these mammoth devices. In the last thirty years, computers have been
reduced in size and cost considerably. Equivalents of the mainframes that used to occupy large
rooms are now carried around in briefcase sized packages. Computers have moved from research
laboratories and can now be found on practically every desk in all industries. The computing
power of a single chip is fast becoming all that is necessary to run the most sophisticated
commercial simulation software. This widespread availability and reduction in cost of computers
has enabled simulation to prosper.
2. Improvements in simulation products: Thirty years ago, most simulation work was done using
assembly language, FORTRAN, or other high level languages. Development time was much
greater, as was debugging, statistic tabulation, and the reliability of results. This situation began to
change with the advent of GPSS in 1961. Since that time, a multitude of simulation languages,
analysis programs, animators, and pre-programmed simulators have become available. Much of
the development time required to create a model has been eliminated through standard features
found in these products. In addition to performing the necessary simulation functions, varying
degrees of user friendliness are available. Simulation languages such as Simscript and GPSS/H
appeal to practitioners with programming skills while non-programmers can enjoy the mouse
driven menus found in many application specific simulators.
3. New opportunities for simulation education: Three decades ago, very few universities offered
discrete event simulation classes. Today many universities offer simulation classes in engineering
and business curriculums. In addition, private seminars and training sessions are available. These
sessions are sponsored by simulation software vendors, consultants, and corporations with an
interest in simulation and modeling. Other sources of simulation education are trade magazines,
academic publications, conferences, societies, and books.
4. Increasingly complex and technical work environments: During the previous few decades the
average work environment has changed from simple manual assembly lines to complex automated
systems. Many repetitive human tasks have been replaced with robots and factory automation
equipment. Conveyors, forklift trucks, storage and retrieval racks, as well as many other factory
floor items are now routinely controlled by programmable logic controllers or computers. This
new complexity has made factory output rates very difficult to predict and manage. Thus, the need
for better analysis tools arose. New simulation techniques evolved to satisfy this demand and were
able to remove much of the guess work and uncertainty in the work place.
5. Computer literacy among analysts and engineers: Computer literacy and use is nearly ubiquitous
among professionals. Everyone has the ability to receive computer training.
6. Competition and tightening budgets - Another factor adding to growth in simulation use is an
emphasis on lowering overhead costs, reducing labor requirements, and streamlining operations.
Much of this has come about as globalization has increased competition and businesses compete
on an international basis.
7. Realization of the benefits offered by simulation: As more industries recognize the benefits of
simulation, investing in capabilities to use these tools becomes more important. Apparent
economic advantages have prompted companies to invest time and resources into this area.
8. Industrial peer pressure: Organizations without simulation capabilities have found themselves at a
competitive disadvantage. This was most apparent in industries, such as materials handling, where
a simulation study accompanying a quotation would lend credibility to a proposed system and
often become a determining factor when the contract was awarded. A situation of industrial peer
pressure was created. Purchasers would inquire why simulation was not being used by their
vendors and demand that some type of through-put guarantee be given. Presently, most materials
handling system request-for-quotations require modeling be performed prior to purchase. Similar
requirements exist in other industries. These forces have been a key factor in popularizing
simulation.
9. Warm fuzzy feeling: Many companies have developed internal simulation groups to model inhouse
problems, proposed systems, and existing manufacturing processes. Presentation materials
such as simulation animation packages have helped to sell internal proposals to management and
create a corporate warm fuzzy feeling. “Seeing is believing” and many simulation packages
available today place an emphasis on graphics and output.
10. Part of an effort to increase quality: Another force related to simulation adoption is a commitment
to quality improvement processes. The success of these philosophies has been demonstrated in
many industries with large productivity gains and improved profitability. A major precept of
quality is prevention of problems. By creating a model of systems to be designed, purchased, or
installed, costly mistakes can be avoided and installations can be done right the first time.