How best to archive and mine the complex data derived from HCS experiments that provides a series of
challenges associated with both the methods used to elicit the RNAi response and the functional data
gathered? To enable effective data retrieval for HCS experiments, data and images and associated
information must be stored with high integrity and in a readable form. HCS data should be stored in a
form that takes advantage of the characteristics of this type of data to enable full access, analysis and
exploitation of the data. A key factor is the database model which represents data in logical form. The
data model (or database structure or database schema) should be flexible to handle the various HCS data
types (i.e., compound information, results: image data and derived metadata), experiment simulation and
a wide range of changes in the data (e.g., different numbers of wells, cells, features, images, different
image sizes and formats, different number of time-points, and so on). The structure of the data model
provides a way of describing data and the relationships within the data, enabling data to be organized,
cataloged, and searched effectively. Databases where a database model is implemented enable joining of
related data to allow meaningful visualization, analysis, and data mining. The data model is also
important for integration with other systems.
HCS data are containing three types of data:
1. Database of compounds (RNAi or small molecules).
2. Numbers of images that require significant amounts of storage.
3. Numbers of files including image processing parameters.
4. Meta-data.
Thus, a large amount of data is collected for just one well of a single plate. In addition, other associated
information about the assay or experiment, such as protocol information, is also typically recorded.
Having four types of data is easy to define three general categories of HCS data:
- Image data: These are the images acquired at each channel for each field within a well and produced
thumbnails for visualization purposes
- Numeric Results data: these are the measurements that result from performing an analysis on an image
with image analysis algorithms.
- Metadata: These are the associated data that provide context for the other two categories of data (i.e.,
metadata are data that describes other data). Examples are: well – compound annotation, assay type, plate
information, protocols, operators, calculated data such as dose–response values, as well as annotations
imported from other systems.
Let’s try to understand how data are produced. HCS microscopes typically scan multiwell plates. These
plates typically have 96, 384, or 1536 wells. Each well is a container in the plate that contains an
individual sample of cells. Each well is divided into multiple fields. Each field is a region of a well that
represents an area to image. Each field consists of multiple images, one for each individual wavelength of
light (referred to as a “channel”, “staining”), corresponding to the fluorescent markers/probes used for the
biology/dye of interest (e.g., DAPI). There are typically between two and four channels per field (e.g.,
each channel shows different elements of the cells: 1 channel nuclei, 2 channel: cell membranes, 3
channel: endosomes, and so on). The images produced are immediately analyzed using automated image
processing. Experiment results are produced.
Each well is seeded with a certain number of cells which has to be detected by image processing
algorithms. The cell number counted is a basic parameter used for the quality control of automation,
microscopy or assay performance. The number of cells per well varies depending on the experiment, but
typically ranges between 5 and 10000 cells. Very often images from well fields are merged into one
image using montage function. For each cell, multiple object features (or measurements) are calculated by
automated image processing. The cell features include measurements such as size, shape, intensity, and
so on.
The number of cell features calculated varies depending on the assay, but typically ranges between 5 and
500.Those features have to be carefully investigated, filtered and only parameters should be considered
for hit definition. In addition, cell features are often aggregated to the well level to provide well level
statistics (one well one row labeled with plate annotation and position as unique identify). The total
storage size for experiments is primarily based on the acquired image data, image thumbnails, library
information and the numeric results data. The amount of data, acquisition and processing time varies
depending on a number of factors including the type of assay, the number of plates, the type of the screen
(primary, secondary), available computational hardware, the throughput of the instrument or analysis
application and the number of instruments which can work parallel. Table 2 demonstrates example
experiments and summarizes necessary time, number of records and require for storage space. The size of
the library information and numeric results data are counted in megabytes. Numeric results are estimated
by the number of feature records (lines in tables). Image storage depends on the number of images
acquired. The number of images depends on plate number, plate type (96, 384, 1536 ), number of fields,
number of channels, confocality levels and eventually time points in case of kincetic studies. The typical
image size acquired ranges between 500KB and 2 MB (single slice, single tiff file without montage).
Thumbnails of those images often are generated using jpeg compression, their size range between 150-
300 kb. For numeric results data are categorized in three types of outputs: cell based, image based and
well based. The number of image based record should be equal to the number of acquired images which is
also equal to the number of thumbnails produced. The record number of well based results data should be
equal to the number of all wells in screening experiment.
In high content informatics, the numeric data are supported by the images and the validation of numeric
data is based on the visual inspection of images. Any high content informatics solution therefore needs to
be able to efficiently handle the relationships between the various levels of numeric results data, library
information and the associated images. In the next subsection we will describe a database model (schema)
and a database solution for handling library data, images and numeric results data.