Biological signal analysis1 encompasses several interdisciplinary topics that deal with analysing
signals generated by various physiological processes in the human body. These signals could be
electrical, chemical or acoustic in origin and an analysis of these signals are often useful in
explaining and/or identifying pathological conditions of the human body. However, these signals in
their rawest form do not provide much information and therefore, the motivation behind biological
signal analysis is to extract (i.e. to reveal) the relevant information. This analysis has become even
more important with modern healthcare striving to provide cost effective point-of care diagnosis and
personalised treatment. Furthermore, fast computing power in recent years has made much of the
more complex analysis methodologies possible. The purpose of this chapter is to provide an
overview of biological signal origins and describe commonly encountered biological signals.
Before we delve into the analysis of biological signals, it would be useful to understand that they are
often represented as discrete in time. For example, Figure 1.1 shows an example of a sinus rhythm
electrocardiogram (ECG), which represents the electrical activity obtained from normal heart. A
single measurement of the signal x is a scalar and represents the electrical signals generated by the
mechanisms in the heart (the details of this process follow later) at a particular instant of time t
(denoted with index n) rather than at all points of time (the involved sampling process to obtain
discrete time measurements from continuous signals will be discussed in the following chapter).
There are two types of noise inherent in this signal: baseline and powerline interference. Figure 1.2
shows a cleaned version of Figure 1.1 obtained through band-pass filtering, which is a subject of
discussion in Chapter Four. This figure also shows a zoomed version of the ECG representing one
beat of heart. The sharp peaks in the signal denote the occurrence of what is known as the R wave
and the time intervals between consecutive R-R peaks would be useful to measure the heart rate, i.e.
the number of times the heart beats in a minute.
Similarly, the segment from the Q wave to the S wave (more commonly known as QRS segment), is
useful in indicating certain pathological2 variations in the heart’s electrical system. For example,
Figure 1.3 shows an ECG waveform from a subject with an ectopic beat of Premature Ventricular
Contraction (PVC) type. Ectopic beats are premature beats with a complex waveform that can occur
occasionally in most people. However, the presence of frequent ectopic beats (more than six per
minute) could indicate a serious fatal problem if left uncorrected. While it is visually obvious that the
QRS segment for the PVC beat is different from Figure 1.1, it is impractical to sit and manually
detect the occurrences from an ECG chart (or on-screen monitor) of a patient over many hours/days.
Rather, a computer that is trained to automatically analyse and detect the occurrence of such beats
using signal processing algorithms is employed. This is a typical biological signal analysis
application. Figure 1.4 shows the typical signal analysis methodologies involved that would be
necessary for such a computer based detection of ectopic beats; the details of which will be discussed
generally in the forthcoming chapters and specifically in the final chapter.
Commonly encountered biological signals that describe the electrical activity of the brain, heart,
muscles etc will be introduced in this section. Some of these signals like ECG and
electroencephalogram (EEG) are spontaneous activity of the human body while others such as
evoked potentials are signals in response to external stimulus, for example the presentation of visual
stimuli which results in visual evoked potential (VEP) signals. While some analysis procedures are
common (like using filters to extract components in specific frequency range), the different
properties of these biological signals do call for the application of widely varying analysis procedures.
Hence, it is useful to know the fundamental details of how these signals are generated before
studying analysis procedures for extraction of the required information.
The ECG is a representation of the electrical activity of the heart and the cardiac rhythm is controlled
by the pacemaker cells known as sinoatrial (SA) node. The PQRST waveform (as shown in Figure 1.5)
represents one complete ECG cycle: P wave occurs when SA node fires and the impulse spreads across
atria and triggers atrial contraction; PQ interval (isometric segment) is the propagation delay when the
impulse travels from atria to ventricles (allowing blood flow to complete in similar direction); QRS
complex occurs when the impulse spreads to ventricles and triggers ventricular contraction; ST segment
is the period when the ventricles are depolarised and ventricular repolarisation (relaxation) begins and T
wave represents the return to resting state by the ventricles [2].
These electrical impulses are normally recorded through electrodes placed on particular areas of the
body either using 12-channel ECG in a hospital or 3-channel ECG in the field. Figure 1.6 shows the
hypothetical Einthoven’s triangle that is commonly used for the electrode setup. The setup requires
four limb electrodes placed on the right and left arms and legs; the fourth limb electrode that is not
shown in the diagram is placed on the right leg and serves as reference channel. The top of the
Einthoven’s triangle forms Lead I, while the left forms Lead II and right forms Lead III. Each lead
represents a different aspect of the heart’s electrical system. The voltage differences between the
limb electrodes: left arm (LA), right arm (RA), and left leg (LL) are used to obtain Leads I, II and III
[3, 4]:
It should be obvious that the three leads have the relationship:
These three leads are normally sufficient to detect life threatening abnormal ECG rhythms
(arrhythmias) and will often be used in this book. Einthovan’s triangle electrode setup does also give
an additional three leads and these augmented limb leads (aVF, aVL, and aVR) can be computed by
[3, 4]:
The six precordial leads provide a more detailed view of the heart’s electrical activity compared to
the six limb leads. These six precordial leads can be obtained by placing electrodes on the chest as
shown in Figure 1.7.