Chapter 7 focuses on taking a simulation project from start to finish. Although the system might seem
simplistic and could probably be adequately modeled using a spreadsheet, the intent is to demonstrate the
thought process used in defining, analyzing, and applying modeling principles. The system to be analyzed
provides a good framework for discussion and will be interesting to a wide variety of simulation (or
potential simulation) analysts. The project will follow the simulation life cycle illustrated in Chapter 4
(See Figure 7.1).
The intelligence phase of the simulation life cycle involves understanding the environment and
determining problems to be solved. This often starts with a general understanding of the system to be
modeled together with a problem definition and feasibility considerations.
DePorres Tours wants to create a simulation to help determine bus capacity for their tour operation and
then be able to utilize the model in the future to pre-test any changes to their operation. Their current
problem statement becomes:
“What size bus will best accommodate expected customer traffic?”
Specifically, they are looking at buying either a 24 or a 48 passenger bus.
Before beginning the simulation project, DePorres assessed general feasibility using the TELOS approach
(See Figure 7.2):
DePorres Tours recently sent Telly O’Sullivan to a simulation training course and has allocated 4 hours a
day for him to gather information and conduct the simulation project. Since it is his first project, he has
been given a month to complete the model. DePorres Tours owner, the indomitable Kafy DePorres has
informed all drivers, tour guides, and office personnel about the project and strongly encouraged their full
cooperation. Additionally, a small team of one driver, one tour guide, and Kafy herself will meet with
Telly weekly to assess his progress and help with any problems. Kafy has set aside adequate funds for the
project and plans to acquire a simulation software package for model development.
Telly, anxious to apply what he learned in class, developed a working view of the system to be modeled.
He used the following definition to help break the tour bus system into its major components.
System: A set of components or elements that are related to each other in such a manner as to create a
connected whole.
Although the table contains some repetitive information, it becomes a working document to help
understand the system and its basic elements.
Based on the data shown in Table 7.2, the system environment can be defined as the road system in
Chicago, existing traffic patterns, and tourism patterns. All these things lie outside the system and have an
influence on its behavior. The systems boundary separates the tour bus system, together with tourists,
driver, route, and stops from the environment.
Telly decided the scope and scale of his model would include the following:
Scope:
1) Customer arrivals and departures will be modeled at each bus stop.
2) Bus driver and bus will be modeled.
3) Bus travel times along the route will be modeled.
Scale:
1) Two customer types will be considered: first time riders and those using the bus as a taxi.
2) Bus driver and bus will be modeled as a single resource. Bus driver behavior will be averaged
into bus stop times. In the future this could be redeveloped using bus driver persims.
3) Bus travel times will be modeled using collected distributions covering an entire day.
Telly decided to use a process orientation view of the system. In other words, he will view the bus system
as a time ordered sequence of interrelated events separated by passages of time. This will influence his
choice of simulation software but is consistent with the recent training he received.
Telly created a couple of concept models to help understand the system better. First he created a
spreadsheet that calculated hourly capacity and average route time (Figure 7.2).
Next he used an Excel spreadsheet with Paul Jensen’s ORMM Queuing Add-ins to create a rough model
of the bus route if viewed as a queuing system (See Figure 7.3).
Both models created quick approximations of the system. However, neither sufficiently captured the
dynamics of the system adequately. This left Telly with no option other than to move ahead with a full
simulation. Both concept models demonstrated a 24 passenger bus could move around 80-84 people per
hour but this was in contrast to what had been observed in the real world. Telly suspected the variance in
the system had not been included in spreadsheets realistically.
Telly’s next task was to begin data collection in earnest. Although he had calculated quick averages he
used in the concept models, he wanted to develop more accurate information. He did this by visiting each
bus stop and collecting customer arrival times as they waited for the bus. Table 7.3 provides a look at the
data he collected at Bus Stop #1. He loaded this into Stat::Fit 2 and determined the tourists were arriving
according to a Poisson distribution with a mean of 3.58 minutes (See Figure 7.4).
Telly repeated his data collection for the other 4 stops and determined the following interarrival rates (see
Table 7.4).
Telly continued to collect input data throughout the week and was able to determine the following
quantitative information would need to be included in the model:
Average Time Bus Spends at a Stop: Normally distributed 2 minutes with a standard deviation of .3
minutes.
Time between Stops (see Table 7.5).
• Passenger Route Decision Percentages (see Table 7.7).
• Qualitative Data. The following assumptions were also gathered:
1) The bus always goes in sequence 1-2-3-4-5 then back to 1.
2) The bus stops even if no passengers are visible at the stop or desire to be let off.
3) Bus drivers change shifts without disrupting the schedule.
As part of the Quality Phase of his simulation project, Telly validated his input data in the following
ways:
Observation: He observed the current system and double checked his input data against what he observed.
Expert's Opinions: He showed the current drivers and ticket sellers his assumptions and input data for
evaluation.
Intuition and Experience: He also used his own experience to double check the data.
Telly continued to check for validation throughout his model development process.